---
layout: post
title: Association Based Decision Making
---


In a nutshell: When we analyze data on decision-making it often appears that people choose on the basis of learned associations. This has led to a lot of association-based theories of decision-making such as classical and operant conditioning, reinforcement learning, and case-based learning. However the same data is also consistent with people having a flexible or Bayesian system for decision-making, and using associations just because in the real world associations are usually predictive. To test associative models we must put people in situations in which associations are a poor guide to behaviour, and see if they continue to use associations. If association-based models fail to predict behaviour in these situations, then our observations about the associativeness of human learning may instead be reinterpreted as observations about the associativeness of the world.

Association-based theories & motivating examples.
1. Pavlov: dogs & bells
2. Konorski/Thorndike/Skinner: instrumental conditioning, cats & mazes
3. Rescorla & Wagner / Barto & Sutton: reinforcement learning
4. Gilboa & Schmeidler: case-based decision-making
5. Camerer: experience-weighted attraction learning

The problem with association-based theories.

Tests of association-based theories.

1. blocking: can be rationalized if you think there’s probably just one valid cue.

2. overlearning & extinction: can be rationalized if longer experience makes you more confident.

3. when people don’t expect associations (negative autocorrelation) e.g. looking for gold, unlikely to be near where previous gold is. (Tolman’s finding of violation of law of effect: when rats find food on one arm in maze, then they tend to switch to another arm; explanation: in naturalistic rat life, once you’ve found food in one place, it makes sense to look elsewhere)

4. the gambler’s fallacy: if they win at time t they decrease the expectation of winning at t+1, in opposition to the prediction of reinforcement/association learning. [heuristic rationalization: caveman Ug is shaking trees to get coconuts out, if there’s no coconut at time t, then an increased probability of a coconut at t+1].

5. Charness & Levin (2005) have a problem where reinforcement & Bayesian updating conflict: you choose between urns, one more sensitive to state, one less sensitive. If your first draw from the less-sensitive urn is positive then it’s rational to switch, but people don’t.
